Thank you. Now, I'll just start with giving an example of why it's important to be counted.
So I'm older, my parents are dead, I'm not going to be kicked out of my home if I disclose information
about my identity. That's not the situation for everybody. I've come here today wearing
a T-shirt saying challenge biphobia. Even wearing that in some countries in the world would
be enough to get me put in jail. But that's not Aotearoa, New Zealand. However, it is important
that we recognise why people, particularly those who may come from different places in
the world, may be hesitant about sharing information about themselves through administrative data,
which they are not confident about being kept safe, secure. They don't know whether it'll
be confidential. They may be a younger person living in a conservative family who is uncomfortable
about their parents seeing them for who they are. This is so for the whole of the rainbow
communities, LGBTIQ plus and all the MVP, FAF, Pasifika terms, these are issues of social
stigma. And the 2023 census, as you will know, was the first time that people were able
to self-identify and disclose confidentially information about themselves in a way that
meant that they could be counted and that that information could then feed into planning
for services for a whole range of areas where it's important to be counted, like 173,000
people on the LGBT plus communities in Aotearoa in 2023. And statistics NZ admits that's an
underestimate because there are still concerns about that confidentiality and trust. But if we
compare that to administrative data first and you asked agencies to give account, you would
probably get maybe 10% of that. As a bisexual person, I have never been asked my sexual
orientation by any government agency that has recorded my information before that 2023
census. So that is invisible information about me. The same with people from
different iwi and hapu who may never have been, when they might identify as Maori, but it may not
go any further. They may not identify, be asked that. So administrative data has got massive gaps
and that is a risk. So as you will have seen from my, I echo a lot of previous submissions about
even if we were living in a perfect society where people felt confident sharing information
about themselves, we're not there yet. And yet that information is really important.
And there's lots of things I could say but I'll, oh and just that when I say it's really
important, I used to help run hackathons using sort of data that's been collected from sources and I
know how important it is to business. But I'll stop there. Any questions? Right, thank you Kay.
I think that's very good and thank you all as we're busy, you're also busy and that
you're quite lengthy submissions. So thank you for that. And I'll just show this to the point
of the camera that I don't know if it can be seen. But I'm wearing badges so that when I'm
traveling people can know that I'm safe to engage with and I'm being counted. But as I say,
lots of people don't have that luxury. Okay, thank you very much. Right. Now Elizabeth Walker, I think
it's that one. Hello. Hello. Hey Elizabeth, we can hear you. Right. We've got five minutes with you.
Thank you. My name is Elizabeth Walker. Good afternoon. I'm here today to ask the committee
to commission an independent report of expert review of the admin data first model and consequence
cessation of the periodic census of populations and dwellings before it's too late.
Just put my camera on. You heard my intro? Yes. Okay. I have over 40 years experience
working in the data modeling management and governance of data. I worked for New Zealand
statistics department, Data Bank New Zealand, Westpac New Zealand and then had 20 years with
Teradata data warehouse where for 10 years I governed all Azure Pacific client data projects
across industries and government. I've encountered a lot of data designs and data problems,
especially data gaps. When clients had manual or perhaps no source systems in place for crucial
data items, data warehouse projects were inevitably delayed or halted and the clients ensuing
business plans and projects were also put on hold. I'm humbled by the range and depth of expert
testimony here today. Please consider the impact of data gaps and low quality data
on New Zealand government's decision making and change management capabilities,
as so many people described. I believe that data and data quality are the lifeblood of every
organization and every government in our modern digital world and without the census data you've
heard that we stand to lose the kete or basket or spine perhaps that connects and contains all
our people information identifying individuals, dwelling location, ages, relationships to
their households and in most cases that's their family. We'll lose granular data about individuals
and families coming directly from people. That's you and me so it's more accurate and probably the
most highly trusted data in government and beyond. It's more than a century of continuous high
quality long longitudinal data and data that directly affects electoral boundaries foundation
of our democracy. Apart from the census no government department council locates people
people, prisons in New Zealand as you've heard and I don't think I can be represented in the same
way as a taxpayer, a beneficiary, a patient, a landholder. Government departments hold
only slim slices of data as we would say. New Zealand's population statistics are key pieces
of our national infrastructure. I view the census data as playing a pivotal role
in New Zealand's national population statistics. I was pleased to see Koi2 come up before me.
I was going to talk about how much I supported their proposals and how integral I saw the
census as part of the population strategy that they were talking about. I can say more but to
conclude along with the repercussions experts here describe it's the lack of process and rigor
that I've heard this morning and reaching this point that is perhaps most disturbing.
Please reconsider our loss of population and family data and commission an independent
expert review of the decisions and options regarding the census. For this abandoned,
thank you very much for listening. Are there any questions?
Yeah thank you Elizabeth. Now any questions from anyone?
This is good. Straightforward.
No thank you Elizabeth that's very good and we've got a number of submissions on the same
topic so I think we'll get a pretty comprehensive view on on the issues but thank you very much
for your contributions. Thank you. Right now I've got Steve Farrow. Steve please come to the
table. We've got five minutes with you.
Hi I'm Steve Farrow and I thank the Surgeon Select Committee for Angus Administrator
or providing me with the opportunity to make this oral submission. I assume you have read my written
submission or have it in front of you so I will not challenge your intellect by reading it too.
My background I studied history and political science and other stuff at University of Canterbury
in the first half of the 1970s then I spent my working life as a high school teacher and then
a union membership educator. The only difference between those two roles was that union members
didn't view me as a boss so didn't tell me to head off. I'm now happy we're tired but still
interested in New Zealand current affairs and political and equity issues. One thing the
committee needs to know is that I take this opportunity seriously that is why the clerk
of the house will receive a bill from me for the trees I have used and the cartridges I have
emptied to print and read the documents for an omnibus bill and that's really hard especially
for individuals in it. My written submission canvassed the high level concerns I had. The
bill and the documents that support it have as had been mentioned just before us have sort of
elated my concerns about the effects on the electoral act and process to adjust consistent
constituency boundaries. I think one document told me that entrenched clauses of the act would
remain that I know about them proves that I listened during my policy lectures way back when.
I'm convinced that admin first data first should be able to provide the data required.
What really concerns me is that as we have heard already admin data first will not have the
data required to know about really important stuff. Government health data does not capture
and is often withheld from the government by minority but important segments of the population.
Maori, Pacifica, disabled, women, gender diverse, youth, GLBTQI plus plus plus plus,
homeless, poorly, homeless, poorly housed, unemployed, those suffering mental health issues
those recently released from prison etc etc etc. Even the proposed census attribute surveys
I think they called will not capture such groups unless well constructed and probably
larger than the three to five percent of the population that has been positive.
The friend of mine even more retired than me spent his working life as a senior statistician.
He had never heard of the admin data first methodology and the survey sample sizes
are very concerning to him.
An equally worrying feature is the movement of the ninth of 2028 census to 2030.
The only reason given is to allow the government statistician and government entities to get
their ducks in a row. Over the last 150 odd years the only missed censuses were for issues of
biblical proportions, world depression, world war, earthquake catastrophe and world pestilence.
To such as civil service convenience and seriously bad weather now count as a biblical
important. I do not want to argue with others who I'm sure have argued for themselves but as an
individual I'm very concerned and comfortable about the intention to move the 2028 census to 2030
because it will have on Maori in particular. That move explicitly shifts consultation with Maori
to the new date rather than before the 2029 election. Why can't the new super and modern system
not begin such consultation from about now?
You may think I'm a grumpy old man I see on the oral submitters list that you will
soon hear from Brian Easton. He wouldn't know me from about so but I remember him as a relatively
young economics lecturer who frequented the town site student cafeteria in Christchurch
in the early 1970s. You'll find out whether the data and statistics census amendment will
make him rumpier than me. Thank you for your time and I'm happy for questions should be there.
Hey thanks Steve. Thank you. Very thoughtful submission.
Right Mr Craig Atkinson is it? Craig are you with us?
All right cool. Hello. Hello we can hear you. We can see you. Hey Craig we've seen you before.
We've seen you before. Good to have you with us again. Good to be with the GSE.
GSE and that again? Yeah no I'd keep it very short for you. I don't agree with it. I think that
you've by the professional people that specialise in this area pointed out it's been traded in
20 countries and not worked and you really haven't got a clue and you just just guessed
in what to do. I think there's a point with algorithms that comes up with election times and
all that information that you collect on us and yeah so no I disagree with that but there's one
in the bin with the rest of them. Thank you. All right hey thank you. Last time we caught it was a
beautiful day and it looks like another beautiful day. It's always sunshine in Bayata will make.
I know that's what you always say. Hey thank you very much. Thank you. Bye bye. Right now
um we create Mr Paul Browning isn't he? Paul are you with us?
Yes good afternoon. Hello nice to hear from you. Oh sorry it's Paula is it?
This is Paula yes. Oh sorry I had you down as Paul so um apologies for that nice to have you
with us this afternoon Paula. Kia ora and thank you for having me. I'm the executive director of
We Create. We Create is the alliance of New Zealand's Creative Industry Association and
creative organisations representing over 30,000 Kiwi creators and creative businesses across all
creative industries from games to music to screening to publishing fashion architecture
advertising design performing a visual arts. We note that the creative sector is highly
digital in how the products and services we make and sell are created marketed distributed
and consumed. We're here today because this bill matters not just to the government and
statisticians but to every creative professional in this country whose work and value is currently
mostly invisible to government data systems. We Create has engaged with the New Zealand
Government Data System for over a decade. We commissioned NZIR to produce the first
comprehensive valuation of the creative sector in 2016 because government data could not tell
that story. In 2026 it still cannot tell it accurately. As it currently operates the data
system does not see us and without deliberate intervention this bill will lock in and magnify
that invisibility. The creative industries are not a niche concern for the data system.
The Ministry for Culture and Heritage reports that the sector contributed 18.5 billion to
GDP in 2025 and employed 122,000 New Zealanders or 4.4% of the total workforce. Creative sectors
are defined by UNCTAD and many advanced economies as high value economic contributors.
In New Zealand the Cabinet approved Amplify Creative and Cultural Strategy
sets out an evidence framework as a core government commitment and deliverable under
the strategy. That commitment cannot be delivered if the underlying data infrastructure is
broken. The data system used by InfoMetrics to produce data for MCH continues to draw
from data systems that do not accurately reflect the creative sector and occupations
as they exist today and have no mechanism for keeping up with technology change.
If we transition to an admin data first census model without fixing the foundations of the
existing system we will entrench what is already broken. The bill's regulatory impact statement
acknowledges that certain communities will be harder to measure under the new model and may
require tailored solutions. The creative sector meets this definition in every respect. Let me be
specific about why. The freelance and portfolio work reality. The creative sector has doubled
the number of freelancers and contractors of any other sector in the economy. Our workforce
is characterized by multi-occupation, project-based and good structure of employment.
Admin data systems built around the employer-employee model are structurally ill-equipped to capture
this reality. Most of government policy, including in education and vocational training,
is still predicated on an employment model that is simply outdated for our sector.
That must change and this bill is the place to begin fixing it. The IRD single occupation model
currently allows only a single occupation to be reported. For a sound engineer who also
teaches composers and earns royalties from a streaming platform, that single field is just
not just incomplete, it is misleading. If IRD data becomes a pillar of the new census model,
these gaps become structural features, not temporary limitations. The classification code
problem is still unresolved, and second ANZOC codes must be updated to reflect the realities of
modern and evolving creative and digital economy. The census transition should not
proceed without addressing these gaps. The digital industry and the rearview mirror problem.
Every industry in our membership is digital. Yet existing data systems do not capture the
breadth or depth of value created by digital creative work. The new census model must
build in live mechanisms to capture emerging digital industries and occupations on an ongoing basis,
not simply take a snapshot of where the economy was at the last classification review.
The investment in infrastructure gap. We want to be direct with the committee about something
that underlies all of this. The minister's announcement framed the spill primarily around
cost reduction. We create concerns that building a new census model on admin data that
already misrepresent and under represents the creative sector and doing to so to save money
is a false economy. We are skeptical that data of sufficient quality and accuracy
sits in government agencies and that it can be extracted into the data system using
resources within agencies existing budget lines. Data is an economic asset. Its value
is seen most clearly in big tech and artificial intelligence companies
where vast volumes of data underpin revenue at scale. The New Zealand government has not
sufficiently prioritized or invested in data systems, particularly in the last three decades,
as technology change made better data capture more feasible, not less.
We have seen a deliberate and resource, we have seen what a deliberate and resource
approach to data can deliver. When Toi Mai, the workforce development council for creative
cultural tech and recreation sectors was established, it invested in a dedicated data
and insights team. That team embedded data thinking at the very start of every project.
In many cases, data and insights were captured that were otherwise have not existed
and were subsequently useful well beyond their original purpose. That is the level
of intentionality and investment that is needed across government if the outcomes of
the spill sets out are to be achieved. Here is what we are asking the committee to do.
That stats NZ formally designate the creative sector as a harder to measure community,
requiring tailored data collection solutions and that this big designation be written into
the transition planning, not left to discretion. Secondly, that the outstanding classification
issues with Anzac and Anzac codes be resolved before the 2030 census transition. Thirdly, that we
create data and insights working group be formally recognized as a co-design partner
in the design of the census attributes survey. Fourthly, that the single occupation limitation
and IRD admin data be addressed as part of the cross government admin data improvement program.
And finally, that stats NZ be required to track and publicly report on creative sector
data quality as part of the periodic review obligations under the amended act.
In closing, the creative sector is one of Artaro's most dynamic economic contributors
and one of its least visible and official data. We've been making this point to
government for over a decade. This spill is an opportunity to finally close that gap
or to lock it in for another generation. We're asking you to choose the former.
We're grateful for the opportunity to present to you today and I'd welcome any
questions you might have. Thank you Paula and particularly recognizing your sector does
huge and growing and hopefully grows even more rapidly. So thank you for a bit of
passionate plea about that. Any questions from Camilla Village?
Thank you. We've heard from some other submitters who have concerns about the data like
similar to what you've raised in your submission only for different sectors.
And I've just been wanting to follow through with them on what the impact of not
improving the data quality would be. So my question for you really is,
if these changes aren't made, what is the impact likely to be for your sector?
It's stagnation in government policy development. We see, I can give you an example,
we're still not counting digital exports in this country. So the value of what
the creative sector is exporting of invisible and government data.
When you're looking at what shapes our industry, we're still another example.
If you're a game developer, you're a software engineer. So we're not understanding where the
work is happening, where the workforces are or valuable things like what's happening with
exports. That leads to policy developments that we constantly happen to go, what about us in?
And being present in places where really the data should be telling the story about where
government policy and support should be heading. As industry, we don't feel that we should have to
invest quite so much time in doing that to help government do its job.
All right. Good. I've got a question from Kyle Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. Thanks for the presentation. Paul really appreciated it.
You make a very strong argument around the data for your sector. My question is,
do you feel that that will be more or less possible in the context of the traditional
census? Or do you think that an admin first approach with an additional focused data
collection for industries like yours could achieve that outcome?
I'm definitely in the and and camp, not the either or. I think there is way more we need to do
with securing good data in this country that lets us make informed decisions. I'm not suggesting
that that solely fits with government, but government obviously has a key role in
holding core data about what's happening in the country and the economy as it relates to
policy development. We have our own industries who correlate their own data. You'll know from
what the committee has been looking at that getting data doesn't come cheaply. So we've got
industries with small budgets trying to create their own data in the absence of
government data. What we need is that government has the core data and that anything the industry
is doing is over and above that in an area that's of particular interest to the industry.
The government having a solid base of core data I think is the important thing.
All right. Hey, thank you Paula for your contribution this afternoon. Very interesting.
Thank you for having me. Right now we're going to grade in Wellington. I see that we've got a few
people on the line. And please come to, are you on your own here? But we've got a friend of mine
well that's I'm on Zoom, have we? You should have. Oh, she's something else. Okay, are you on your own or?
You want to come up? Yes, please. Fiona's one of our offices. Yeah, good. Fantastic. And we have
Darren Pultz, our chapter on online. Yeah, are they online? Not yet. But anyway, let's not hesitate.
If they come online, we'll happily join them. All right, thank you. Can I just ask a question
whether the staff have got this presentation? If not, I can just talk to it anyway. Say that again.
Have this staff got an, oh no, he was going to put it online. That's okay. I have copies. You have
copies. Oh yeah, we do want to hand them around. Yeah, we'll get, all right, fine. But we have
got your submission as well. So that's brilliant. Yeah, fine. So just take it as read. I'll take
this read as here. Thank you. We can share even better because we're a collegial group up here.
Excellent. Great to hear. All right, fantastic. All right, I'll introduce myself first. I'm Claire
Johnston. I'm a regional councillor, first term representing the Porirua Tawa area. But this
presentation is, of course, on the whole region. Why are we presenting on this bill?
We're doing this because as an organisation, making evidence-based investment decisions
for our communities means that we have to actually understand our data to make those
decisions. It's pivotable. Robust data matters. We're responsible as a regional council for long
term network and place-based planning across transport, land use, infrastructure,
emergency and hazard management, and of course, for resilience. We plan and invest over a 20 to
50 year time plan, and often for assets that will span across many generations.
Our decisions balance the growth, safety, equity and environmental protection,
and should always be value for money. We're required by legislation to base our decisions on
sand evidence and robust data. As a councillor, I always expect evidence and robust data.
Regional spatial planning and how we plan our region and how we consolidate urban growth
around existing growth corridors, how we pair urban growth with economic development,
how we stage growth over time. All matter. The bulk water supply is another issue.
How do we anticipate population growth with water supply when we make these investment
decisions? Water, of course, is up for debate at the moment, but it's really important you
have consistent information and understand where your region is going.
Rural urban flood protection, the level we build into flood protection and schemes,
is that 1 to 50 protection? Is it 1 to 500 protection? Or do we do? Do we take into account
that since January, I think we've had 72 incidents of national or district emergency
management issues. Public transport is big for the Greater Wellington Regional Council.
It's probably the area that I get asked the most questions about. We have to have
really good information, a really good understanding of our population and where our population works
and where our population goes to school and where they get to.
So why does it matter to us? Why sets us?
GWIC combines the latest science with historical data, current information,
future forecasting. We also have to understand the patterns. We use these assessments to
develop our policy to make the investment decisions, land use planning and as I said
emergency planning. We can't function on fragmented population data. Disaggregated
in the Ministry of Data sets only work enacted to a strong centrally collected national
population count. I personally watched over the years data that isn't collected properly
or it's inconsistent in its collection. I've seen a particular in economic data.
If you weaken the national collection, at least regional councils carrying planning,
emergency, fiscal and equity consequences without a reliable evidence base.
Census data presents a single source of truth that we and our communities and we can build
and get behind when we're making decisions. Central population statistics are critical
to regional infrastructure. They provide a single authoritative population baseline
that we rely on. Decisions to invest in 30 to 100 year lifespans must be based on good data.
Emergency management depends on that data. Hazard management depends on it. So the
statutory planning and legal defensability is weakened if you don't have evidence.
The costs and the responsibility could fall on to councils if we have no solution. That concerns
me because collecting data is imperative. You can't have inconsistency. You can't have one
region connecting data one way and one collecting it another. There must be consistency.
It also affects you as policy makers. If you can't see the whole,
you risk fragmentation in your own policy decisions. So the bottom line for us is weakening
national population collection does not empower regions. It fragments the system. It increases
the risk and it undermines some of those critical infrastructural decisions. We do support
innovation and the use of administrative data needs to improve. We acknowledge there have been
problems with efficiency and time andness. However, it's essential that the new model
continues to provide accurate, trusted and sufficiently granular population data
at a regional, territorial and community level as well as your national level.
To conclude, it comes down to the quality and detail of the data.
We're reminded that New Zealand does not have a great track record in large-scale data projects.
The challenge to this select committee is to ensure that for the transition,
organisations like Greater Wellington will continue to have robust and reliable data
from which to make our decisions. Flying blind in the future does not
really be a thinking about, we cannot do that.
Right. Mr. Pondler, do you want to say anything or anyone else?
John, Darren.
Kia ora. Kia ora, Mr Chair. Kia ora, members. I know very eloquently presented by Councillor
Johnson. Thank you. I think the underlying thing here is that we are making billion-dollar
decisions. We're often doing that on a co-investment basis with the government.
And so the issues that Claire has put on the table with you about
reliable data relates as much as anything else to our relationship with our co-funding partner,
which in most cases is the government. Okay, cool. Right. Members, questions?
Right. Camilla Billidge. Thank you. Thanks both of you here and Darren as well for your
attendance and for your submission. We did have a question in an earlier submission about
the data collected through rates. And I just wanted to put it to you as the first council
that we've spoken to since then. What information do you get from collecting rates and what's the
limitation on that in terms of the overall information? I can make a comment on what I
think limitations are, but I'm going to go down and to speak to it. Yeah, so thank you, Camilla.
Rather unique situation for regional councils. Most regional councils rate via the territorial
authority. So you receive your, well, if you're in Auckland, it's a different set of circumstances
altogether. But in this region, the Haudenosaunee, the Carpity District Council, for example, rates
for us in the Carpity area, they get that data. We don't generally interrogate that data.
We wouldn't generally base large investment decisions like a billion dollar
water collection scheme, which is on the cards for us. We wouldn't generally base that on
rating information. We would base that on census projections about how the population is likely
to change over the next 20 to 50 years. All right. Hey, well, thank you for your submission.
Thank you for coming in person. That's always nice, but comprehensive submission. Thank you.
And following on with that same vein, we're going to local government in New Zealand.
Okay. If you're there, we're looking forward to hearing from you from local government.
Hello, Fran. How are you going? I'm well. Thank you. Good to see you today.
So I'm here as mayor of South Warrarapa with Palmerston North Mayor Grant Smith,
who I hope is also online somewhere. Hey, so Fran, Fran, sorry to interrupt,
we can't see you. It's very, very blurry. So you can't, how's that?
No, we can't see anything. We just are green. Something in front of your camera.
My video is on. That's weird. I can see you. Oh, you're right. It is blurry.
It's like something under the camera. You're just about. No, my camera is completely free.
Anyway, I don't, I can't, I'm not sure what's happened there.
Doesn't matter. We can hear you. I don't want to get in again because I won't get in again.
No. So if it's okay, maybe I'll just talk. I'm not sure. Yeah, that's great.
Why the camera is obscured, but I'm looking, doing it on my laptop and there's nothing in front of
it. So, um, so I'm here for local government New Zealand and Grant Smith also. So councils are now
seeing their populations changing in more diverse ways than we ever have in the last 50 years.
And to plan ahead, we need population stats about small areas. For example,
measures such as the deprivation index, which is derived from the census and provide,
provides mesh block data. Every council is going to be affected differently by the
growth in the elderly population. But there are other trends impacting also.
For example, changes in farming practice, less dry stock, more forestry have had major
population impacts in some rural areas. And on the other hand, in urban areas,
growth in retirement villages or growing concentrations of townhouses have driven
changes in demand for services. Although population projections provide reliable
signals of things to come, councils also need much more local knowledge.
Currently, there's just insufficient evidence that the use of the records from government
agencies, which will be dated, will give us the data we need. Councils are in the frontline
in the provision of information and managing public interest, but in an increasingly cost
constrained environment with a rates cap looming. We see this every day. For example,
we're managing historical underinvestment in infrastructure. The cost of relocating this
capital investment would be prohibitive once it's established. So we need to get as much
data as possible along the lines of what Greater Wellington have just said. Regarding services,
there's low political tolerance of loss or reduction resulting from change in population
structure. And we don't want to be in a worse position than we are now in forecasting future
needs. We're currently in a period of radical population change, and after two failed censuses,
local government needs assurance that there's more behind this than third time lucky.
There's been increasing calls for the select committee to establish an independent review
of the proposals, and we support that. Lastly, it's ironic that we're here today by accident
rather than being properly involved by Stats New Zealand. As a significantly affected group,
we'd expect to have had a high level of engagement on such sweeping changes.
Local government should be seen by Stats NZ as a useful partner with which they can work. Even
when planning a census, we can provide local knowledge to enable robust decisions about
the resources required to do the job properly. This didn't happen in 2018 or 23. There were
preventable mistakes such as Haast being missed out completely and Kawerau grossly undercounted.
Saving money by abandoning the census or not undertaking it properly is just wrong,
and future planning will be seriously impacted by not having adequate correct data on which
to base decisions. Thank you, Andrew, Mr Chair. That's all for me, and hopefully Grant will
have a couple of comments, and then we've got questions if you wish.
Grant, please.
Yes, hi, Chair Andrew. Thanks,
Mayor Fran. Look, I think Fran has summed up all the detail very well, but look, we understand
the fiscal conditions are tight, but a census is really, really fundamental to effective
decision-making. We're just going through our annual budget and giving an example,
our Pacifica community, which is quite large with about sort of 6,000 to 7,000 people,
came in and they do feel some of the data around there, their sector isn't as good as it could be.
So, abandoning a proper census would possibly make that even worse. Look, we do think most
Western countries have a form of a census. It isn't the traditional
one survey type, but there are many different hybrids, and we do think that if we don't do that,
and the 2004 independent evaluation panel said New Zealand wasn't ready to move to the
administration model. So we do, from a position of knowing our local communities really,
really well, we're absolutely sensing this could be an absolute disaster for future planning.
If there isn't a little bit of thought given to, and again, I understand the fiscal requirements,
but putting back something in that census space, because we've just seen how
unreliable some of the individual government departments and administrative
budgeting has been. I'll leave it at that. Ralph, have I missed anything?
But that sounds all good. Thanks, Grant.
All right, good. Thank you. Now, I've got a question from Todd Stevenson.
Thank you, and thank you both for your presentation. And disappointing, Fran, to hear that,
yeah, you weren't properly engaged in the...
Do you want me to wave my finger on your behalf, Fran?
Yeah, we can see you.
I can see you and hear you.
We can see you.
Yeah, I have a different question though, because obviously, I think it is important that
local government is engaged with Stats New Zealand. Has there been an engagement?
Because obviously, local government holds a whole lot of administrative data. Has there been
any engagement to your knowledge with Stats New Zealand about getting access to that administrative
data? Ralph would have to answer on behalf of LGNZ, but certainly none in our council, and none
that I know of. I'm not aware of any engagement of Stats New Zealand with LGNZ.
All right, well, that's it.
I might also, Mr Chairman, answer Kamala's previous question about rates data.
We can't use that for other reasons. We'd love to be able to use our rates data,
and to be able to talk to our citizens about all sorts of things, but you're actually not allowed to.
Okay, and just to chime in from a city perspective,
you know, we've had some real issues in the past with soldiers being
unaccounted for when they've been on deployment and on talking thousands of people.
We've had international students, and again, we have thousands of those,
and how they are properly counted. So just some of that population
database, it does become very, very difficult, and we just don't seem to,
to Todd dance, your question probably have all the dots really joined up.
All right, thank you, your worships for your contribution, been very helpful
and revealing, actually. And no doubt we'll be asking some questions. Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Right, now we're going to Professor Kana, I think, was that right?
Thank you, Mr Chairman and committee for the opportunity to speak here on behalf of Tinguera,
the Institute for Population Research at the University of Waikato. We certainly welcome the
opportunity to comment on the data and statistics amendment bill and the associated electoral
amendment bill, which together, as we have been hearing today, fundamentally shift the
collection, analysis, use and quality of population level information here in Aotearoa, New Zealand.
So really, unlike local government New Zealand, Tinguera, the Institute for Population Research,
is a trusted consultation partner of Stats New Zealand, and we have been engaged
along the ride of the census modernisation approach. We include Professor Tahu Kukutai,
who's an internationally recognised expert in Indigenous data sovereignty, and who was involved,
in fact, in the checking of the quality of the administrative data sources when they were
used to backfill gaps in the 2018 census. We also include Dr GC Whitehead, who was a member of the
expert independent panel on the census that we have also heard about today, and myself, I'm a member
of the Pacific Data Sovereignty Committee, which has a memorandum of understanding with Stats New
Zealand and worked to support Pacific representation and engagement in the previous census.
And I've also been a member of the Ethnicity Data Standards Expert Advisory Group.
So all of that engagement means that Stats New Zealand will not be surprised with the focus of
our submission, and that we strongly oppose this bill, and really have significant concerns,
expert concerns, about the implications and the risks associated with this bill.
I'm noting that our submission has been read by the committee. I just wanted really
the opportunity to speak today to a couple of points that speak not only to the bill and
the wording of the bill, but actually also the wording of the regulatory impact statement
that accompanies the bill, noting that this is described as an interim riz, and that there
would have intended to have been a future riz that described further information that I think
is really pertinent to this committee's decision, but also to cabinet-related decisions.
And the first point really is, as we all know, the bill removes the requirement for the five-yearly,
fully enumerated census of population and dwellings. The text of the bill instead requires the
government statistician to publish in each financial year statistics from a census of
populations and dwellings. I think it's really important to recognise how we are not meeting
the definition of a census, even in the wording of this bill. And in fact, the riz describes that one
of the objectives is to ensure an ongoing supply of population data that meets international
best practice and international standards. But we are not meeting international standards
or international best practice of a census by using administrative data in this model.
We are not seeking full enumeration. It is not so simultaneous. We cannot produce small
area statistics. And all of these things are international requirements for a census.
I'm not entirely sure that even if this bill was to be enacted that the government statistician
would be able to fulfil that requirement. And it is indeed attractive to have greater
frequency of population statistics and to be more efficient in the way that we use the
administrative data that we are collecting. And we are collecting more and more administrative
data. We here in Tinguera were involved in establishing the IDI Lab at the University
of Waikato. And we work on a number of projects using administrative data.
But it's also important to understand those contextual features. And indeed the contextual
features associated with the sort of character of frequency of annual data collection,
while it may indeed be very possible to collect and to link data, sorry, at one point
in time and to start that in an annual cycle from 2030. It's not necessarily when that data
has been collected, might be linked at that time. But that data might have been collected
some time ago. And the longer and longer we get away from a population census,
the more we don't understand actually about the accuracy of that data and the timing of
that data collected. So frequency is not really potentially all that it's cracked up to be.
I also wanted to specifically point to another reason why this new model is being proposed,
as described in the RIS and in other Stacks New Zealand documentation and many
consultation engagements we've been involved in. It's described that this responds to the
emerging data needs of key population groups and also responds to the ability of our
administrative data to provide key census variables. In this documentation the key
population groups that are described include Māori, Pacific, Rainbow communities, families,
those living in specific geographic locations, those experiencing disability, those experiencing
homelessness, key variables described include detailed ethnicity, multi-ethnicity, languages
spoken, housing quality. But actually all of these variables are really the ones that will
not be replaceable within administrative data. These populations are the ones that will have
differential missingness that we know will result in differential targets and differential
policy provision which will have outcomes for those populations and for our tearoa
society as a whole as we know exacerbated inequities are enormously costly for us as a society.
And then finally on that issue of cost, one of the solutions proposed to these critical and
differential failings of administrative data include the census attributes survey that
we've been hearing about and ensuring that there are tailored solutions for key populations groups.
I think it's really important to understand that we don't know enough about these solutions
in order to make this bill, to let this bill proceed. We don't know the size of that survey,
the size of the survey that's been proposed has already been reduced from 5% to 3%. We don't
know that mode. I think it might be an online survey which again will provide quite differential
quality. We don't know the sampling frame. Without a census you don't have that population
understanding on which to draw your sample from. And most importantly we don't know the costs of
the census. We also don't know the costs that are required across government to improve administrative
data and we haven't had any assessment of the enormous costs of doing this wrong.
So therefore we strongly oppose this bill. We support the need for an independent review.
We support the need to consider a population register and a dwelling register in Aotearoa in
order to improve these baseline understandings of our population before we even think about
such transitions. And we support the need for a continued actual full enumeration census
in the meantime so that we don't make costly decisions that have a differential impact.
Thank you very much.
Any questions? Look we've heard many points before. It's not to say that they're not valuable but
thank you very much for your paper and just for reiterating those points today. Thank you.
Right now we're going to New General Council for Civil Liberties. Yeah cool, lovely.
Yeah we've got two minutes with you. Great, thank you. My name is Steven Ensign. I am the Deputy
Chair for the Council for Civil Liberties and I am perhaps foolishly going to depart from my
prepared remarks to be more in conversation with things that other people have said.
First the council would like to tell the committee that Statistics New Zealand is the
government agency that engages with us most effectively. We meet with them regularly. They
are quite open and friendly and speak openly with us about important things and we wish that other
agencies primarily corrections would be vastly more open in answering to our concerns. So we'd
like to thank them for that. Good to hear. The council's message for you for this committee
for Parliament is simple. We can and should conduct a full enumeration survey census in
2028. The narrative that we've heard from Statistics New Zealand and the Minister that we
have to do away with the census that is too expensive and that they have a new approach.
We do not have confidence that the new approach is ready and we do not believe that the case has
been made that we need to abandon the approach that we have been using. The council cares deeply
about the census and about our democracy because we believe that those are foundations for having
civil liberties. We're not alone in that belief. We cited that the committee for racial
discrimination comments in our written submission. We believe that every one of the human rights
committees will have the same thing to say that if we are intentionally reducing the
quality of the data that we are collecting we should expect the outcomes that we are producing
to decline in step with that. These bills do not merely reduce the quality of the civil liberties
and the freedoms that people will be encouraging. They are going to reduce the quality of every
last government service. The data that we require to make government decisions comes from the
census and if we reduce the quality of that data then the government will inevitably make
less good decisions. Finally, these bills are doing more than removing essential government supports.
We have been systematically dismantling safeguards designed to prevent mass surveillance.
The council has been working for some time with Statistics New Zealand about the IDI.
We are opposed to the way that the IDI operates. We believe that the new ISDS is a technically
superior system and it has better safeguards but the whole process is not one that we believe in.
We believe that the government should not be combining data from all of its administrative
systems into one system to give it an optical view of every individual's life.
What would it do instead?
What we did before, every ministry takes care of its own information. The administrative data is
collected for a single purpose. That is in its definition and it is fit for that purpose.
And when you start combining data from different sources that were collected for different purposes
you start introducing all kinds of operational and civil liberties risks.
Finally, it was just mentioned that the population register is just mentioned.
The council is opposed to a population register for the same reasons that we just talked about
about the IDI. And we also would like to reiterate our call for an independent review
to be commissioned on reports. There was a lot of detail on our written submission.
I hope you have some questions.
I've got a question from Rima Nakhle.
Thanks, Mr Chair. You just said that collecting data from different
government sources, admin sources poses civil liberties risks. Can you give for our audience
an example of one or more of those risks that you can think of that come to your head?
I mean, so the primary risks are outcomes of surveillance, right? The more the government
knows about you, the more that it's possible to single you out and interact with you based on
a basic specific information. Yeah, I've stuck my foot in it now. I mean,
this whole system we have for controlling government information flows stems from controls that were
enacted after the Second World War to prevent our governments from being able to do the things that
Nazi Germany did. Okay, thank you. I can't mention it if I can, Mr Chair. Okay. Thanks for that.
But the information already exists. So how do you foresee the risk happening if the
information is already there? And I can understand there's a lot of people that have those concerns.
I get those concerns sometimes as well. There is a difference between having the
information there potentially and having the information there in a format that's ready to use.
All right, now I've got a question from Todd Seuderson.
Thanks. I think there's probably a lot more we could do about the visibility to citizens
about the data the government holds. So I agree with you on that point. But
interesting, actually, totally something that no one else has recommended. Your recommendation
five, and it should be heard earlier that around 500 people after a census are charged or whatever
find for not doing it. And yours is a point around changing the owners, I'm assuming,
for those prosecutions. I mean, fundamentally, we don't think that forcing people to answer
government surveys is going to result in better data quality. And so
our whole perspective on the issue is that if people aren't going to voluntarily
provide the information that the course of tactics are not appropriate.
Right. So you're recommending that we make a change to the, yeah, basically the owners
of proof. I guess. But your point has got to be a willingness rather than a requirement.
There is a risk that if we just force everyone to provide an answer that the quality of the answers
we get starts to climb. Yeah. All right. Hey, thank you for your contribution. And thank
you for waiting patiently. Thank you. Yeah. I'm hoping Anand Keegan is here. And I thought
that was your, I've read your name before. So do you want to come to this context?
Thank you. Now, we've got five minutes with you. Okay. So my name is Alan Keegan. I'm a statistician
that's worked in the public sector for about 15 years. With respect to all of the people
that represented, they've told you about data quality, social license, all those sorts of things.
But I think if that really mattered, none of us would be here today. People have been saying this
for the Data and Statistics Act Bill 2022. They've said it for the census reviews.
Some of the people who have spoken today were selected by the government to give advice on those
or to chair those or be involved with those. But
so I'm not convinced that data and evidence is going to persuade you. So the only thing that's
left is to actually just tell you that it's not in your own personal self-interest as ambitious
politicians. Most of you are, most of you are feeling new to Parliament, elected in 2023 or later.
It's just really, are you sure you want to do this? Is that what I'm saying?
Hang on. We're not in a denied statistical environment anymore.
The statistics portfolio is not just a nice training wheels portfolio for new
incoming ministers or a signal from the Prime Minister that you're on a performance-improved
plan. The statistics portfolio is going to make or break your career in the future, I think.
So this is what you're signing up for. I'm going to give you some real-life examples of how
administrative data doesn't always tell you the truth about the world. So in the 1980s,
millions of children disappeared overnight in the United States, not because there was a massive
abduction of children, but because the Inland Revenue Service required parents to add their
children's social security numbers to their tax returns. Here in New Zealand in the 1990s,
the Maori mortality rate jumped, not because there was a massive reduction in their health,
but because ethnicity was started to be required on death certificates. A more personal example,
when I worked for the Ministry of Health, I was looking at costing data for hospital procedures.
I personally saw data where for the most lengthy and complex orthopedic operations
with medical implants, for some DHBs, according to their systems, those implants cost $0.10 each.
And in terms of... Why would they only cost $0.10? They didn't.
They cost hundreds or thousands of dollars. Yeah, I know, but why did they make them $0.10?
Because the way that the data attributed, for those that you might be familiar,
the analysis was for what they call purchase units. Do you attribute... Well, think about...
I'll use something like basic supplies like bandages, panadol, whatever. How do you attribute
that to the patient or to the ward or to the days? Yeah, that's the reason.
And in terms of your own personal self-interests as ambitious politicians who want to be re-elected
this year, I think, you want to make it into the cabinet. The census is the backbone of
one of the resources at your disposal that hasn't been carved off exclusively by the executive.
You're so rendering what little control that you have over the data and advice that you get
given from public servants like me to the hands of generic middle managers who aren't
statistically literate or the ones that don't understand how the system works,
the ones that don't understand, for example, that you're counted as employed,
if you work only one hour per week or that house prices aren't included in the consumer
price index. So the alternative to having a high-quality census and a high-quality infrastructure
around it is that your ability to service your electorates, your communities, is going to be impacted.
And do you think a first-term backbencher is going to be able to afford in their budget
lots of data scientists and consultants to get information when, for example,
you know, if you're trying to advocate for your Kohanga Reo in the South Island when your
electorate is bigger than the South Island, do you want to have the more,
I'm not saying this is going to happen, but I'm talking about the general direction,
do you want something like the infamous Chinese-sounding surnames for house purchases
to be the highest quality of information that you can get? So yeah, it's appeal to your own
naked self-interest. Like, are you sure you want to do this? Are you really sure?
That's what I'm going to ask. I don't think any, I don't, if the high-quality submissions here
were going to persuade you, the bill never would have made it want to be all the paper.
Yeah. Right. Hey, well, thank you. Any questions?
I don't think so. That's not to say we have listened to you.
Yes. So I think I'm going to just say this. I think you have personal ambitions to be more
than a brother step, right? Yeah. All right. Thank you very much. Thanks, Alan.
Right. Now, we're going to Tigger Wells on Zoom, is that right?
Yeah. Tigger, are you there? Yes. Sorry. Hopefully, you can hear me.
Yeah, we can. Excellent. Okay. Just grappling with the settings.
Okay. So here we are. Right. Okay. Yuri?
Yes. Okay. Sorry. Okay. Around 1990, I was in the UK working as a lead developer
on our national registration system for the variety of diverse potential clients
whose populations range from a few hundred thousand, for example, Malta and Barbados,
to hundreds of millions, the former Soviet Union then known as the Commonwealth of Independent
States, or the CIS. And as part of the development, that development, for test and
demonstration purposes, I created a rudimentary database of 10 million individuals,
apparently living in family groups, et cetera, et cetera. As a consequence of this work,
in particular, and subsequent roles, including with national health networks,
and I go to our precursor to Realme, I have an uncommon insight into the many aspects of
individuals' information, an emphatic appreciation of its diversity and sensitivity necessary to
embrace it. My own hypothetical population was entirely fictitious and intended merely for
testing and demonstration of the system drawing upon my imagined individual's existence.
That is how I see the information drifting should the periodic
complete reset be evaded to save costs. The ideology of homogeneity in the population
repeatedly expressed by some, most vocally by David Seymour, is exactly that, an ideology where
all different and each one of us are valid individuals deserving of recognition.
This is statistical projection of chronologically degrading information
occasionally freshened by some survey group, the provenance of which is at the mercy of
those in power cannot reflect the true nature of the dynamic population.
Those who are not conveniently close to the perceived profile will neither have representation
nor awareness that they are invisible and overlooked. Even should their disappearance
become apparent, how might it be rectified? Those likely disparate individuals can shout as loud
as they like, assuming they have that capacity, but being heard may be impossible.
With an entrenched system to which they are alien, more and more the population will be
expected to live as though they are within the ideological range of existence permitted by the
population model. I represent on a few directional vectors, if you like, minorities who are at risk
of omission by the normalized expectations of which would come into force, should the
senses be lost. Are you there? Have you finished or? I have finished that presentation. I
wasn't entirely sure exactly how long it would take. Okay, very good. Thank you.
Any questions? So your proposition, just to encapsulate it, I think, is that
with the removal of senses it becomes much more difficult to get detailed information on
minority groups. Am I right in saying that? Yes, indeed. I believe the minority groups stand
increasing risk of just being lost in the noise of the homogeneity.
In the first part of your submission, you talked about the entire national project.
Is that something you're recommending that stats look at, or are you just saying that that is
possibility? Sorry, I don't follow your question. Well, in the senses, you
talked about a tool offering immense wealth of data regarding a snapshot of the entire
national population. Was that a technology you were suggesting that stats might employ
or just something conceptually? Well, as I understand it, the senses is the basis, which is
effectively entirely refreshed every time we have a census.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for your submission. Thank you very much indeed.
Right. Now, we're going to the Blind Citizens submission that we missed just before lunch.
Is that you, Rose? We can't quite hear you.
Thank you. Yes, it is Rose, and Jonathan has just joined us.
Thank you for the opportunity and for the perseverance behind the scenes to resolve
the... It's good that you've come back. Perfect. Okay. So I'll just start off.
Not sure sometimes it's helpful for Jonathan to actually know who's present,
whether that's possible very quickly. That would be great. Thank you.
Well, there's a normal representation of the committee. So we've got a mixture of
opposition government members. So there's seven of us, I think, on the hearing your
submission today. All right. Thank you. I can update Jonathan later. So first of all,
I'll just start off and then I will be handing over to Jonathan. But we'd just like to make the
point that there is really good cooperation working with Stats NZ officials in the current
environment. And there are some great champions within Stats NZ. However, it's commitments that
we need. And what we are going to do and is refer to Jonathan's personal submission,
which Blind Citizens New Zealand does endorse. But much has been shared by earlier submitters.
Our view is that the bill's justification remains incomplete without evidence that the proposed model
can maintain or improve data quality. So Jonathan, I'll hand over to you now to speak in more
detail about the points that we really want to bring home.
So hopefully I'm heard. Yes, you are. Lovely.
But I think the important thing for us to note as an organization representing
blind and low vision people across the country is that the proposed move actually is a two-edged
sword. A move to a census attribute survey type environment will put less burden on blind and
low vision people because they will be seen and need to engage less frequently.
And the experiences that they have when an interaction is required will be handled in
a more accommodating fashion. But this is actually only guaranteed if we take the notion
of making what is called reasonable accommodation. If we take that from a moral obligation
and make it a legal imperative.
So we need to see that that becomes the minimum standard or the way that stats NZ officials
will work with blind low vision and for that matter other disabled people as well.
On the other hand, so that's the good experience, on the other hand,
the admin data space is a potential minefield.
The quality of data that ends up in the system that is not directly supplied by
or verified by a blind or low vision person is going to be questionable.
And I'm going to give you a real concrete example.
I have two NHI numbers today. I have the one for the bulk of my life and I have the one
when the emergency department staff muffed the form and I am unable to correct that.
What is further staggering about admin data is that because I don't interact with the health
system for needs explicitly relating to my blindness, you can't tell that I'm blind.
Not from admin data because all of those records that say that I'm blind predate everything digital.
So admin data for blind people is likely to be of poorer quality than the average citizen.
We've got no protections in law putting an obligation on government agencies
to ensure the data they hold about us is in fact fact.
Furthermore, even if there was a legal imperative, the ability of blind and low vision people to do
that for themselves is doubtful, probably heading towards negligible.
So the admin data for our community is almost certainly of a much lower grade than what
we see from census data today. Rose has pointed out that we do have a good working relationship
with stats NZ, but blind low vision and other disabled people need that commitment and
trying in law so that it cannot be lost with the flick of an official's pen like was a disability
survey with ministerial sign off in 2018. The United Nations Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disability is our reference document. It's what government signed up to in 2008.
But far too often, the energy of organisations like ours is spent educating government officials
on what that government commitment means and the obligations it places on agencies
to do the right things for and with disabled people. Articles nine, all about accessibility
and 31 on data are specifically relevant to us. The first article nine is all about the way
is all about the way individuals can interact with systems.
But even if you change it for this bill, it will only apply to the interactions we have with stats
NZ. It's the interactions with the other agencies that remain doubtful. Article 31 of the convention
is all about the obligation on the state party. That's you to ensure that meaningful
data is available disaggregated by disability status.
I've ended up with the specific recommendations in in my personal submission
that could have been copied in but you then would have to read them twice
into the Blind Citizens NZ submission. Thank you for your time. Love questions.
Right. Thank you very much to both of you.
It's pretty straightforward, I think. Yeah. Just take us back. What happened in
with the disabilities in 2018? You're saying the courtesy of a budget decision reached without
parliamentary oversight. The scheduled New Zealand Disability Survey was axed in favour of
Te Kupanga. Disabled people were put in competition with Māori. We lost in 2018. They lost in 2023.
Right. I've got a question from Raymond Knackley.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Jonathan, more of a proposition rather than a question. With respect to your
NHS number, I'm very happy to help your local member of parliament try and fix that up for you.
Thank you. But it's currently sitting as a lovely demonstration of the inadequate
of admin data. You can try and sort it out there. It's not using me. It's also a great example of a
receptive local MP. I know I've got one of those. Yeah, good. Hey, thank you, Dr Godfrey and Rose,
for your contribution today. That's very good. Thanks a lot, mate. Okay. Thanks. Now,
thank you. Thank you. We're going to Godfrey Britcher who's coming in by Zoom, hopefully.
Where's the option to leave?
Can't leave.
Right. Mr Britcher, are you there?
Right, we are here.
Mr Britcher, are you there? Can you hear me now? Start my video.
We can. Nice to hear from you.
Good. Well, thank you very much for having me. This, I believe, is the most important,
one of the most important functions of government, the select committee. So I think this is a
very important perspective that you, very important role that you had to do.
Look, I'm going to try and break my presentation into roughly a half or two-thirds and a third.
The last one is about my operational experience as a census manager for Hamilton on Waikato,
and how it relates to the first. And the first is really, I started very positively to make positive
contributions and say, yes, yes, we must try and do better. We must do more with less.
And that is absolutely always a fact of life for whatever you do in government,
whatever we do in daily lives or institutions. So improving is the name of the game,
and I'm very, very strongly behind that. But having said that, look, I have now analyzed the
submissions and I've even got AI to help me to do that. And it seems that there are very deep
concerns about data quality. And the fact is that statistics is a fundamental foundation of
policy, good policy for the future, as many people have mentioned. So I have changed my view
and think that an inquiry is required or a review or formal review because it needs,
this is so important to the country that it really does that. However, now I'll move on to,
if it's going to happen, what could be done better? Now, I had seven recommendations
and most of them have been raised already. So I'm only going to concentrate on the two
that have not been raised, I understand. And the, sorry, one of them was raised,
but I just want to reinforce that a commitment from the CEOs at top level is really important.
And you should, if you're going to get, if you're going to get that sort of commitment to get data
quality, you must get CEOs of those different organizations to commit very strongly. Now,
the ones that were not, the ones that are unique of my presentation is that I'm suggesting
as a strong motive data, you should be providing a reward in the currency you are working in,
that is data. So when people have to give data or are inclined to give data,
give them a reward of data that's relevant to them. It'll cost a bit more, but I believe it'll
do A, statistics quality gathering, positive factor, but B, it'll also help government as a whole,
because government is losing the trust of people. And we've, there's plenty of reports to do that.
And that's again, across the world, not just New Zealand, but we've suffered from that too.
So that was one thing that I have recommended that no one else has. The other, the other one,
it was a little bit more controversial. And that is that before money is transferred money or services
or grants transferred from government to bodies that need it, people that need it, organizations
that need it, whatever it is, you get some sort of a commitment that they provide you
information of useful quality. And again, you know, it's a two way, we live in a world that's
always a two way street. Relationships are very, very important. Now, the final point I've come to
in my census experience comes to this business of community. We have lost a lot of the sense of
community in the world and in New Zealand. And I think a lack of a census is going to strengthen
that loss, not, not, not, not weaker, not mitigated. And so I'm just to give you a little example
from my census I had at the peak, just under 200 people, that's not current turning turnover,
reporting indirectly to me through about 24 people reporting to me directly.
They were a wonderful team. And I want to point out and emphasize, I didn't understand how
Prime Wales had a census was a failure in 2023. To me, it was not. We got 92% return rate,
something very high, which was in line with past good ones. 2018 was really bad. But anyhow,
coming back to this community issue, my staff just brought in so strongly to collecting data.
They felt really committed to what they were doing. They did their best. And one of the
measures, for example, that we'd been given good lines, but you know, go back, if you can't get
data the first time, please go and knock on the door on a second and a third and maybe a fourth.
Well, my record in my group was eight. And we didn't, I didn't set a limit because I became
to trust these people. And these people showed how important it was for the personal contact.
And we all know this, this works very, very well. This Zoom works very, very well, but nothing
beats personal contact. And so anything that helps personal contact, and here's another point,
we're losing community, we're losing personal contact. So there's another cautionary note about
dropping a census for that reason, because it also helps, I believe,
government to understand and people to understand what government is and how, you know, it's a
very dry subject. But boy, do people understand how important it is. So that's my message is,
please take this very, very seriously, more seriously than I submitted in my positive
proposal. And I've moved a bit against rushing off and dropping census. I do understand,
because it's very, very expensive. It costs 238 million last time, but about 40 million of that
was because of the Gabriel weather, weather thing. And, and even still 180 or 190 million
in science, far too much. But I think it does more and is more important than people realize.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Right. Thank you very much for that. And you're right. Two suggestions
around accountability is very welcome. Members who put in questions. Thank you.
And great to hear of the diligence of the team in pursuing and trying to get
accurate information. It's good to hear that personal story. Hey, so thank you for joining us
this afternoon. We will certainly consider those two unique proposals you put forward in your paper.
So thank you very much. Cheers. Thank you. Right now, Research Association New Zealand.
Now we've got 10 minutes with you. I presume it's Mr Mills and Ms Turner. Is that right?
Thank you. All right. Good afternoon. Good afternoon, Chair Bailey. And thank you,
members of the committee, for your time. We appear on behalf of Research Association of New Zealand.
We represent the market research companies in New Zealand, along with our clients, both
internally within commercial and government research insights teams, but also the public
and private organisations that use our data to make decisions on a day-to-day basis.
Population data is core to what we do every day. It's the basis of all the decisions we make
in terms of research design and the recommendations we give out the back.
And we want to be upfront with our concerns from the start. We're not here to defend the
status quo. The 2023 and 2018 census, we all know had issues, but we don't think that those issues
best served and fixed by the solutions that are put by this bill.
Declining participation is a genuine challenge. We see it in our members' work,
we've been dealing with it for over 20 years, and we've found ways of dealing with it
that are useful. We also agree that administrative data is a real and underused
asset in New Zealand, and we think it should be used more, but in the right contexts.
So the question we're putting to the committee is not whether the change is needed,
but whether this particular change at this particular pace will produce better population
statistics or worse ones, and we argue that the current bill will produce the latter.
We've got two specific concerns, which we've outlined those in our submission.
We want to draw some examples of those today and also provide some solutions.
The biggest area of concern for us, and you've heard from a number of submitters today,
is around small area data. Port Waikato, for example, if you start looking at 5% of the
population there and base your decisions on 5% of Port Waikato, you might be coming up with
some interest. Never heard of the place. Every decision that shapes daily life at a local level,
we had to build a school, how to grow your business, what health resources are needed,
depends on knowing with precision where those people are and where they live.
That 5% annual survey cannot consistently deliver that. Stats New Zealand's own regulatory
impact statement say so. It acknowledges in its language reductions in data accuracy,
detail and coverage, particularly in small populations and in local areas.
That's not our characterization of the bill, that's Stats New Zealand's characterization
of its own proposal. The communities most exposed to these problems are also the ones
least able to compensate for it. EWI Government's bodies making resource decisions, as you've
heard, Pacific Health Funders looking for funding and defensible numbers, a business
owner needing to build a robust market estimate to get funding. All will struggle
with this new regime.
There are technical tools that can be used to help this. We can use oversampling,
we can use booster samples, we can use multi-year pooling, but they need to be
mandated in the legislation and they need to be resource sufficiently to make sure
that they're delivered consistently and within a similar framework right through.
At the moment the bill does not require any of this and we'd like to work with the
committee on what a specific amendment to address small area data adequacy could look like.
Our second concern is the transition timeline. The bill proposes to make administrative data
the primary source of population statistics. You'd think after 30 years I'd get that word right.
Mandatory from 2030 and that's just four years from now. The Nordic countries are the standard
that is used as a reference point for this kind of reform and it's a fair one.
They've done it very very well in their system's work. What the comparison doesn't mention is
that they've been doing this for 50 years and they started developing their registers,
their population registers back in 1967. Denmark, Norway and Finland made equivalent
investments over similar time horizons. They're not systems created by, these are not systems
created by legislation and goodwill. They are the product of five or more decades of sustained
institutional investment, consistent data governance and legal frameworks that require
uniform recording standards across all public agencies and we definitely don't have that at
the moment. New Zealand's data administers, data sets are not there. Different agencies
collect different data using different definitions, different update schedules
and different coverage standards. The result is a fragmented picture of the population
and one that's even thinner for the communities that interact least with government systems.
Stats New Zealand's own regulatory impact statement implicitly acknowledges this.
That concedes early year reductions in government and coverage and accuracy,
which we take as a careful way of saying the system will not be ready by 2030 to produce
the quality of statistics that it's currently replacing. You've only got to look at the
complexity of something like Te Whātuawera has faced in getting its own systems to align
internally. Now multiply that across every government agency and you understand the
scale of what's being proposed. We're not saying we can't get there, we're saying four years
is not long after and it's not responsible to retire the traditional census before the
end of the year is demonstrably ready to replace it. The transition should be contingent on the
infrastructure actually being ready, not on the calendar date that's been set.
We have a number of skills available within our own member base that we'd like to make use,
I like to offer as use and we've already started engaging with Stats New Zealand on that.
We have a direct experience and survey design and response rate recovery and community engagement
and we have access to international evidence bases as well on what works in addressing participation
decline through our connections with international industry associations.
We're offering to participate in whatever independent review or co-design process
follows this committee's work as practical technical contributors.
We want to leave the committee with three specific tests each of which could be addressed
by an amendment. One is the local reliability standard, the second is the data readiness
test and the third is the community participation standard. These are all things we think would
add value to what is being proposed. The local reliability standard would require
the minimum standards for small area data adequacy including over sampling and
booster sample provisions within the population that are defined,
resourced and independently verified before the administrative data model is used as the primary
sense. The data readiness test would require that benchmarks for administrative data
infrastructure readiness are defined and independently verified before the traditional
census is retired. The transition could be triggered by demonstrated readiness and not by a fixed date.
And finally the community participation standard would require a funded public participation strategy,
not a communications plan but a genuine behaviour change program to be independently designed,
resourced and evaluated before the transition periods. New Zealand has done it before and
we've done it really well. We think we can do it again with the census. Management of future
pandemic and biosecurity risks are examples of when this buy-in and the data that it
contributes will be vital. The same approach applied to census participation with proper
resourcing and genuine community partnership could reverse the declining response rates
and give us the quality of data that we deserve.
If these three tests are in the legislation our position changes noticeably. We're not opposed
to this reform succeeding. We want it to succeed on terms that will actually serve New
Zealand as well and deliver data that can inform decisions that help us to succeed.
Thank you for your time. We take your questions.
Hey thank you very much. Very good submission.
I'll just say yeah so obviously those three tests yeah maybe if you've got anything you want to
provide to us additionally that would be great. You can see in those room?
Yeah because that's yeah sounds so it's basically like a gateway before we rely totally on administrative
and some really really clear testing of the systems before we put it in place
rather than jumping straight in. Also your suggestions in section seven of your
submission I thought were very helpful. Thank you.
And this issue around making sure that quality of any admin data in its current form and what
might be captured or should be captured in the future is crucial. We just heard that Mr.
Bridger talking about making CEOs accountable but also how would you go about doing that?
Would you have a sort of a do you rely on stats to undertake that role and provide feedback?
Or do you think it needs to be independent? So if people have to deliver bad news they're not
compromised so independent to express it. We deliver bad news all the time.
An independent oversight would be useful. The key is having consistent
ways of measuring things across everywhere. If you look at the councils for example
and how you measure what a house is in a different council they vary and the data
quality on that varies quite considerably. According to Auckland Council I live in a
four bedroom house. I'm still trying to find the fourth bedroom and I'm short one toilet.
I've tried to get that changed but it's not important to them. That information when
it's aggregated goes into planning. So if you multiply that up by the number of houses in
New Zealand you can see the problem. Yeah. Okay. Kamala?
So final question. Just in relation to the part five of your submission you would have heard
any of the other submissions. A similar call for an independent review.
You put in some information about some international examples where there have been
reviews. What in your view would a New Zealand equivalent review look like?
I think the key element that's got a really broad range of stakeholders. I think this
process has highlighted the range of interested parties and the uses of data that even we weren't
aware of. The range of submitters has definitely highlighted that. It needs technical expertise
in there as well and it needs I think a cross-party approach. This is data that will
update all of us and so this is something that has to sit out for 20 or 30 years.
The value of data is not just now it's the trends that it creates in the long term.
Thank you. Right. Thank you very much for your submission.
Right. Sam, I see you're sitting there. We've got two submissions and we know who you are.
And so nice to see you again. So do you.
And we've often seen shortly as I said. But anyway we've got your submission
for yours. Five minutes I think. Martin. Oh you're very careful because you, yes.
Right. Yes. So it's in ballot productions as concerned with the census bill. Now we haven't
put a position whether it's for or against. We're wanting to make sure that it's robust and
have safeguards in place so that there are steps in place for data corrective measures.
And our biggest concern is the Maori electoral population considering I'm in my 30s right now.
My Maori friends are having bigger families than my non-Mori friends.
So that's something that I've noticed that's been evident. That's also come up between
the two last census that the Maori population has gone up by 3% or the population that I've
identified has gone up. The other concern which was this was discussed after we submitted it but
is the 2028 planned census. Our biggest concern is the fact that we are borderline on
eight Maori electorates in the country. And we want to make sure with the new proposed
boundaries that go on for the next election, every Maori electorate MP has 5,000 more constituents
than their North Island counterpart. And that itself is already quite on a dicey line.
And that could be entrenched for two elections. And we're concerned that that is going to put
a lot of stress on those MPs who already themselves are covering quite some geographically large
areas, including, was it Te Tai Tonga being the biggest one? We, was it now on a more personal
note, I'm one who's only ever done an electronic census in my life as an adult, including the
census place lost by 2013 electronic census. However, they managed to get my landline number
that they only would have got from that census to ring me to say it was missing.
So I think that is something that can be a bit of a laugh considering in the previous census,
I was in a different part, I was in the O4 telephone corridor, not the O6. So that's
something on there. You have a landline that's shocking. At that point. At that point. Just
checking. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, at that point. So that that that's something that's,
yeah, that was quite intriguing that happening. And also on data matching, this was something
I was warned when I was on the unemployed benefit, be careful, get paid fortnightly,
because working income only has 48 weeks in the year, because they can't comprehend five,
was it three fortnights happening in one month. And so that's a data collection going wrong.
And often anyone who's been on the benefit working incomes, right, the beneficiaries are
wrong, even when the commissioner of the IRD backs the beneficiary over working income
over the wrongly established debt. So that is something with administrative data mistakes
can happen. And it depends who's important data, who collects the data. And so we want to make sure
that we keep some record or a failsafe that goes back so we can at least get our population
records accurate or adjusted, especially when administrative anomalies come up,
so that we at least have some sort of way of correcting the data. So at least we still have
accurate things to do planning. We, for it's in ballot uses it, not for general elections,
but local body elections, we look at we have to look at data to find out where's the right place
to run our shows. Fakatane District Council is quite an interesting one, because Murupara doesn't
think it belongs anywhere with itself in there. And, but trying to work out for that particular
council to embody a general ward, where was the biggest population centre and where was the one
that would bring in the best in studio audience. So that's something we like to do. And yeah,
I'm glad we're one organisation that has put that place on the map. Yeah.
Right, do I take it you've finished? Oh, for this submission, yes.
We're poised for your next one too. Right, members, any questions?
Yes, reference to Harry Styles. Yeah, Stacey did that one, not me, from Mr Carl Vates.
Thanks, Mr Chair. Just in regards to the census in 2028 and the impact on the 2029 election,
my understanding is that the 2028 census will not happen in time, even under the old model,
to ensure boundary changes are in place to the 2029 election. So I'm just,
there's been a few submitters that have raised that today. And I just wanted to
see if that's your understanding or what your understanding is of the timing from
the census to then do the boundaries review in order for them to be ready for that
2029 election. My understanding is that that timeframe, it's not possible anyway.
The reason why we didn't have a boundary redraw for the 2023 election was because the
census happened in the same year and the legislation states that it has to wait one,
if the two collide, it waits one year. But I think we may have had in the past where there
have been a couple of elections very close to censuses, such as the census 2001 was very close
to 2002. And 2002 also had a snap election. And we managed to cope with new boundaries at that
particular point with the 2001 census. So I'm not sure whether there is the exact delay.
It depends when the planning part starts happening. That's the big part in there because
the planning changes that for 2023 census that elected the electoral boundary changes
didn't happen until last year. Whereas I would assume they would start in 2028 if the
census happened or right at the beginning of 2029 to ensure those new boundaries were in place
ready for the 2029 general election. Right. Is that right, Carl? Yeah, I have a little bit there,
chair. All right. All right. Thanks, Sam. Thank you. Right. Now, last one before we're going
to have a little bit of a break. And that is Anna Muir who's coming in by Zoom. Anna, are you with us?
Just struggling with the camera. That's right, Anna. We can hear you loud and clear.
Okay. Okay. Now I've got a button to use. Okay. So... Oh, there you are. Yes. So it's good to
join you again, less than a week after the English Language Bill hearing. I think there's some overlapping
themes between the English Language Bill and the Census Bill today. This bill obviously relates to
very complex topics with lengthy historical origins. So some of the different words that we're
using make it difficult to communicate the concepts. But so I guess along that line, I thought it would
be helpful for me to start by referring to... Well, by using the words about small area information.
So those are words that I've heard in the hearing today. They are on page 21 of
Len Cook's written submission. I think it's 2.10b. He speaks about continuing the existing
rich array of small area information. There was an earlier discussion suggesting that
Port Waikato is an example of small area. Yeah, very appropriate examples from both of you.
Yeah. So I'd like to highlight the needs of central government and local authorities,
the areas that have unit titled developments. As the recent purchaser of a unit titled
Townhouse in Auckland, I have quite deep insights about the problems in the central government
as well as Auckland Council data processes for those scenarios. That causes problems
not only for property transactions, but for planning purposes, with Auckland being in the
middle of the plan change 120. Processes. There are some very unhelpful narratives
that are based on, I guess, poor data. So I have identified some problems in central government
data about unit titled properties and developments. I have recommended in the second part of my written
submission that the Unit Titles Act of 2010 be amended. So there is a mandatory reporting obligation.
So central government data is shared more regularly, more transparently.
So all relevant decision makers in public and private contexts have access to that information.
Locally, there's at least one story in the spin-off where people are saying, well,
all of the townhouses are being built in West Auckland since we had the 2016 Auckland Unitary
Plan. Those narratives are based on building consent data. Whereas I live in a 1985 townhouse
that was built in a development established under the Unit Titles Act of 1972, before
digitised processes came about. And so the age of my property has resulted in some data related
problems. A bit like Jonathan Godfrey's story earlier about how the records of his blindness
predate digitised health records. So just coming back to the base themes of population dwellings
in digital government, depending on the age of a building on a property, there are, I guess,
gaps to be resolved if we can get better collaboration between Statistics New Zealand
and LINZ and others as Len Cook has recommended. The first part of my submission summarises,
I guess, the range of interested parties and it identifies some groups that are often overlooked.
So I think it would be worthwhile to specifically refer to those groups if the bill proceeds
and that particular section is amended. If we were really going to refine the statute book,
we could also sharpen up the New Zealand Business Number Act of 2016. Just before I
allow some time for questions, I did want to note that I will make a supplementary submission
because I have an email from Auckland Council to explain why they did not make a written
submission. I've just got a problem with the screen here. So I'll send this through in writing,
but the message I got from Auckland Council on the 23rd of April was,
it was considered that an Auckland Council submission would not affect the outcome of
the proposed changes, which was primarily related to the timing of the census and the role
of the government statistician to deliver an annual census. There was no perceived contrast
with Auckland Council's strategic framework and it was deemed low priority. As a rate payer
in Auckland, in New Zealand's largest city, I find that a pretty disappointing response from an
unelected representative of Auckland Council. I recommend that your committee requests
advice or information from Auckland Council, with Morris Williamson being the former
Minister of Statistics, that should help to foster some sort of input. But yeah,
we're dealing with really important topics. So I also support the other recommendations
to involve experts with a proper review. Right, thanks Hannah. We have heard from
local government New Zealand, you've probably heard that. But Auckland Council is different
and they're not a member of local government New Zealand. The rate payers of Auckland need to
be reviewed by Auckland Council. No, no, no, let me add,
this is a procedural point actually partly I wanted to mention. So it was a relatively lengthy
public consultation period from the 5th of March until the 15th of April. They had a lot of time.
It is disappointing that the submissions were only published on the Parliament website on Friday.
I have hand delivered a copy of Len Cook submission to my friend, the Hon Simon Watts,
Minister for Auckland and Minister of Local Government. And I pointed him to recommendation
three on the cover of Len Cook submission. It says, I recommend that the Justice Committee seek
advice from those who are affected by the bill in local government. Hey, thank you, Anna.
Thanks for that recommendation. And your specific drafting suggestions, very helpful. Got a lot
going for you, you're at Tugger University, Lord agree, very good. And you're in the Epsom
electorate, so gosh, Anna. Yeah, and I forgot to mention that Len Cook delivered the graduation
address at the University of Otago on the 6th of May, 2000. So that set the scene.
Unbelievable. Okay, thank you, nice to see you again. Okay, thank you. Bye-bye.
Right, members, we're going to have a break. Near this we can come back in three for a
little bit, right? Oh, the coffee.